Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the renal regulation of acid-base and potassium.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the role of the kidney in acid-base balance.
The kidney has the central, if slower, role in acid-base balance,
being the only route for the excretion of the fixed,
non-volatile acids and the organ that ultimately regulates the bicarbonate,
so completing what the lungs begin.
The body continually produces, from metabolism, two kinds of acid:
the volatile acid, carbon dioxide, excreted by the lungs; and the fixed,
non-volatile acids — such as sulphuric and phosphoric acids from protein metabolism
— which cannot be exhaled and must be excreted by the kidney.
The kidney performs two essential tasks. First,
it must reabsorb all the filtered bicarbonate,
since the loss of this large filtered load of base would itself be a severe acid
challenge.
Second, it must excrete the daily fixed acid load,
and in doing so it generates new bicarbonate to replace that consumed in buffering
the acid.
These processes are achieved by the secretion of hydrogen ions by the tubule,
and they are regulated according to the acid-base status,
the kidney increasing acid excretion in an acidosis and reducing it in an alkalosis.
The renal response is powerful but slow, taking days to be complete.
So the kidney is central to acid-base balance as the only route for excreting fixed
acid: it reabsorbs all the filtered bicarbonate,
and excretes the daily acid load while generating new bicarbonate,
by the tubular secretion of hydrogen ions — regulated according to the acid-base
status, a powerful but slow defence completing that of the lungs.
Describe the reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate.
The reabsorption of the filtered bicarbonate is the kidney's first acid-base task,
and it must be nearly complete, because the filtered load of bicarbonate is large
and its loss would constitute a major acid challenge;
most of this occurs in the proximal tubule.
The mechanism is indirect, since the bicarbonate ion itself is not directly
transported across the luminal membrane.
Instead, the tubular cell secretes a hydrogen ion into the lumen,
in exchange for sodium; this secreted hydrogen ion combines with a filtered
bicarbonate ion to form carbonic acid, which,
under the influence of carbonic anhydrase on the brush border,
dissociates to carbon dioxide and water; the carbon dioxide diffuses into the cell,
where, again by carbonic anhydrase,
it reforms carbonic acid and so a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion;
the bicarbonate is then reabsorbed across the basolateral membrane into the blood,
and the hydrogen ion is secreted again.
The net effect is that for each hydrogen ion secreted,
a filtered bicarbonate is reclaimed — reabsorption rather than net acid excretion.
About ninety per cent occurs in the proximal tubule.
So the filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed, chiefly in the proximal tubule,
by the tubular secretion of hydrogen ions which combine with the filtered
bicarbonate to form carbon dioxide and water,
the carbon dioxide entering the cell and being reconverted to bicarbonate for
reabsorption — a carbonic-anhydrase-dependent mechanism reclaiming the filtered
base, the first step of renal acid-base regulation.
Describe how the kidney excretes acid and generates new bicarbonate.
Beyond reabsorbing the filtered bicarbonate,
the kidney must excrete the daily fixed acid load,
and in doing so it generates new bicarbonate to replenish that consumed in
buffering; this net acid excretion is achieved using two urinary buffers,
since free hydrogen ions can lower the urine pH only so far.
Once the filtered bicarbonate has been reabsorbed,
further secreted hydrogen ions are excreted, buffered in the urine in two forms.
The first is the titratable acid, chiefly phosphate:
the secreted hydrogen ion combines with filtered phosphate buffer,
and is excreted as such.
The second, and more important and adjustable, is ammonia:
the tubular cells produce ammonia from the amino acid glutamine,
which combines with secreted hydrogen ions to form ammonium, excreted in the urine.
For each hydrogen ion excreted in these buffered forms,
a new bicarbonate ion is generated within the cell and added to the blood,
replacing the bicarbonate consumed in buffering the fixed acid.
The net acid excretion is thus the sum of the titratable acid and the ammonium,
minus any bicarbonate lost. In acidosis,
the production of ammonia is increased over days,
greatly augmenting the capacity for acid excretion.
So the kidney excretes the fixed acid load buffered as titratable acid — chiefly
phosphate — and as ammonium, generating a new bicarbonate for each hydrogen ion so
excreted; the ammonia system being the adjustable component,
increased in acidosis — the mechanism of net acid excretion and the regeneration of
bicarbonate.
Describe the renal response to an acidosis and to an alkalosis.
The kidney adjusts its handling of acid and bicarbonate according to the acid-base
status, increasing acid excretion in an acidosis and reducing it,
even excreting bicarbonate, in an alkalosis — the renal compensation for,
or correction of, acid-base disturbances.
In an acidosis — whether the primary disturbance is respiratory or metabolic — the
kidney responds by increasing the secretion of hydrogen ions,
so that all the filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed and additional acid is excreted;
crucially, over a day or two, the synthesis of ammonia is greatly increased,
augmenting the capacity to excrete acid and to generate new bicarbonate,
raising the plasma bicarbonate — the renal compensation for a respiratory acidosis,
or the correction of a metabolic acidosis.
In an alkalosis, the kidney reduces hydrogen ion secretion,
so that not all the filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed and bicarbonate is lost in
the urine, lowering the plasma bicarbonate and producing an alkaline urine —
correcting the alkalosis; though this is impaired if there is volume or chloride or
potassium depletion, which maintain an alkalosis.
The renal response is powerful but slow, taking two to three days to be complete.
So the kidney responds to an acidosis by increasing hydrogen ion secretion and,
over days, ammonia production, raising the plasma bicarbonate;
and to an alkalosis by reducing hydrogen ion secretion and excreting bicarbonate —
a powerful but slow compensation, impaired in alkalosis by volume,
chloride or potassium depletion, that defends the pH alongside the lungs.
Describe the renal handling and regulation of potassium.
Potassium balance is critically important,
because the plasma potassium must be kept within narrow limits for normal cardiac
and neuromuscular function, and the kidney is the principal regulator of potassium
excretion, matching it to intake.
Potassium is freely filtered, and most of the filtered load is reabsorbed in the
proximal tubule and the loop of Henle, relatively independently of need.
The regulation occurs chiefly in the distal nephron — the late distal tubule and
the collecting duct — where the principal cells secrete potassium into the tubular
fluid, and this secretion is the main determinant of how much is excreted,
varied to match intake.
The secretion is driven by the activity of the basolateral sodium-potassium pump,
which loads the cell with potassium,
and depends on the electrochemical gradient and the permeability of the luminal
membrane.
Several factors regulate it: aldosterone is the principal hormone,
increasing potassium secretion; the plasma potassium itself,
a rise stimulating secretion; the tubular flow rate and sodium delivery,
a high flow increasing secretion; and the acid-base status.
So potassium is filtered and largely reabsorbed proximally,
but its excretion is regulated by secretion in the distal nephron by the principal
cells, driven by the sodium-potassium pump and controlled chiefly by aldosterone,
by the plasma potassium, and by the distal flow and sodium delivery — the kidney
matching potassium excretion to intake to defend the plasma potassium,
vital for cardiac and neuromuscular function.
Describe the factors that affect potassium excretion, and their clinical relevance.
Because potassium secretion in the distal nephron is influenced by several factors,
disturbances of these factors cause disorders of the plasma potassium,
of great relevance to anaesthesia given the effects of potassium on the heart.
The principal factors increasing potassium secretion and excretion are:
aldosterone, so that mineralocorticoid excess causes potassium loss and
hypokalaemia, and its deficiency or blockade causes retention and hyperkalaemia;
a raised plasma potassium, which directly stimulates secretion;
an increased distal tubular flow and sodium delivery, which is why many diuretics,
by increasing distal flow, cause potassium loss; and an alkalosis,
which increases secretion, while an acidosis acutely reduces it.
The acid-base interaction works both ways, as discussed.
Other influences include some drugs.
The clinical importance is considerable: hypokalaemia, from diuretics, vomiting,
or mineralocorticoid excess, and hyperkalaemia, from renal failure,
potassium-sparing drugs, or acidosis,
both disturb cardiac excitability and can cause dangerous arrhythmias,
and both must be recognised and corrected, particularly before anaesthesia.
So potassium excretion is increased by aldosterone, a raised plasma potassium,
increased distal flow and sodium delivery, and alkalosis,
and reduced by the opposite; disturbances causing hypokalaemia — from diuretics,
vomiting or mineralocorticoid excess — or hyperkalaemia — from renal failure or
potassium-sparing drugs — both dangerous to the heart and important to correct
before anaesthesia.
Pull it together: how does the kidney complete the regulation of acid-base and
potassium balance?
I would draw it together around the kidney as the organ that completes the
regulation of the acid-base balance and is the principal regulator of potassium,
both functions resting on the tubular handling of ions and both of great importance
to the patient.
For acid-base, the kidney is the only route for excreting the fixed acid load and
the ultimate regulator of the bicarbonate:
it reabsorbs all the filtered bicarbonate by secreting hydrogen ions in the
proximal tubule, and excretes the daily acid load buffered as titratable acid and
ammonium, generating a new bicarbonate for each acid excreted;
it adjusts this according to the acid-base status,
increasing acid excretion and ammonia production in acidosis — a powerful but slow
defence completing that of the lungs.
For potassium, the kidney matches excretion to intake by regulating its secretion
in the distal nephron, under the control of aldosterone,
the plasma potassium and the distal flow. The two are linked through the shared
tubular transport and the acid-base–potassium interaction.
So the kidney completes acid-base regulation by reabsorbing filtered bicarbonate
and excreting fixed acid with the generation of new bicarbonate,
adjusted to the acid-base status; and regulates potassium by controlling its distal
secretion under aldosterone and other factors — slow but powerful regulations,
linked to each other, that are central to the internal environment and to the safe
conduct of anaesthesia.
Describe the intercalated cells and their role in acid-base handling.
The intercalated cells of the collecting duct are specialised cells responsible for
the fine, regulated handling of acid and base in the distal nephron,
and their two types allow the kidney to excrete either acid or base according to
need, an elegant arrangement.
Interspersed among the principal cells of the collecting duct are two types of
intercalated cell.
The type A, or alpha, intercalated cells secrete hydrogen ions:
they possess hydrogen-ion pumps on their luminal membrane,
which actively secrete hydrogen ions into the tubular fluid,
generating bicarbonate that is returned to the blood across the basolateral
membrane; these cells are active in acidosis,
excreting acid and generating new bicarbonate.
The type B, or beta, intercalated cells do the reverse:
they secrete bicarbonate into the lumen and reclaim hydrogen ions to the blood,
and so are active in alkalosis, excreting excess base.
The relative activity of the two types is adjusted according to the acid-base
status, so the collecting duct can finely tune the excretion of acid or base.
The hydrogen secretion by the alpha cells can acidify the urine to a pH as low as
around four point five.
So the intercalated cells of the collecting duct handle acid and base:
the type A cells secreting hydrogen ions and generating bicarbonate,
active in acidosis; and the type B cells secreting bicarbonate,
active in alkalosis; their relative activity adjusted to the acid-base status,
allowing the fine, regulated excretion of acid or base,
and the acidification of the urine — the final adjustment of renal acid-base
handling.
Describe the renal production and role of ammonia in acid excretion.
The ammonia system is the principal adjustable mechanism for the excretion of acid
and the generation of new bicarbonate,
and its capacity to increase greatly in acidosis is what gives the kidney its
powerful, if slow, ability to respond to an acid load.
Ammonia is produced in the proximal tubular cells,
chiefly from the metabolism of the amino acid glutamine;
this metabolism yields ammonium and, importantly,
generates bicarbonate within the cell, which is returned to the blood.
The ammonium and ammonia are secreted into the tubular fluid — by direct secretion
and by the diffusion of ammonia, which is then trapped in the lumen as ammonium
when it combines with a secreted hydrogen ion,
the acid urine keeping it in the charged, non-diffusible form,
so trapping it for excretion.
For each ammonium excreted, a new bicarbonate has been added to the blood.
The crucial feature is that the production of ammonia from glutamine can be greatly
increased in response to a chronic acidosis, over a day or two,
so the kidney's capacity to excrete acid and generate bicarbonate rises severalfold
— the adaptive component of the renal acid response.
So ammonia, produced from glutamine in the proximal tubule with the generation of
bicarbonate, is secreted and trapped in the acid urine as ammonium for excretion,
a new bicarbonate being added to the blood for each;
and because ammonia production is greatly increased in chronic acidosis over a day
or two, it is the adjustable mechanism giving the kidney its powerful adaptive
capacity to excrete acid.
Describe renal tubular acidosis.
Renal tubular acidosis is a group of disorders in which the kidney fails to handle
acid normally, causing a metabolic acidosis despite a relatively preserved
glomerular filtration rate, and it illustrates, by their failure,
the normal renal acid-handling mechanisms.
It is a normal-anion-gap, hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis,
arising from defects in the tubular handling of acid or bicarbonate rather than
from a failure of filtration. There are several types.
The distal, or type one, renal tubular acidosis is a failure of the distal nephron
to secrete hydrogen ions and acidify the urine — a defect of the alpha intercalated
cells — so acid cannot be excreted,
and the urine cannot be made appropriately acid even in the face of acidosis.
The proximal, or type two, renal tubular acidosis is a failure of the proximal
tubule to reabsorb the filtered bicarbonate,
so bicarbonate is lost in the urine until the plasma level falls enough for the
reduced reabsorptive capacity to cope.
The type four is associated with aldosterone deficiency or resistance,
causing a hyperkalaemic acidosis with reduced ammonia production.
So renal tubular acidosis is a normal-anion-gap metabolic acidosis from defective
tubular acid handling: the distal type from a failure to secrete hydrogen ions and
acidify the urine, the proximal type from a failure to reabsorb filtered
bicarbonate, and the type four from aldosterone deficiency with hyperkalaemia —
disorders demonstrating the normal mechanisms of renal acid handling by their
specific failures.
Describe the internal, or transcellular, balance of potassium.
Although the kidney regulates the total body potassium over the longer term,
the plasma potassium at any moment also depends on the distribution of potassium
between the cells and the extracellular fluid — the internal balance — which can
shift potassium rapidly, and this is of immediate clinical importance.
Potassium is overwhelmingly an intracellular ion,
the great majority of the body's potassium being inside the cells,
so that the small amount in the extracellular fluid,
which determines the plasma level, can be markedly changed by shifts of potassium
into or out of the cells, much faster than the kidney can act.
Several factors drive potassium into the cells, lowering the plasma level: insulin,
which stimulates the cellular uptake of potassium — exploited in the treatment of
hyperkalaemia; the beta-two adrenergic catecholamines, similarly; and an alkalosis,
in which hydrogen ions leave the cells and potassium enters.
Conversely, factors driving potassium out of the cells raise the plasma level:
an acidosis, a lack of insulin, and cell damage or breakdown,
as in rhabdomyolysis or tumour lysis, which releases the cellular potassium.
So the plasma potassium depends not only on the total body potassium,
regulated by the kidney, but on the internal distribution between cells and
extracellular fluid: insulin, beta-agonists and alkalosis drive potassium into
cells, lowering the plasma level, while acidosis,
insulin lack and cell breakdown raise it — rapid shifts of major clinical
importance, exploited in treating hyperkalaemia and causing dangerous changes in
disease.
Describe the causes and emergency management of hyperkalaemia.
Hyperkalaemia, a raised plasma potassium,
is a potentially lethal electrolyte disturbance because of its effects on the
heart, so its causes and its emergency management are important to the
anaesthetist, who may encounter it acutely.
The causes fall into three groups: increased intake, rarely a cause alone;
reduced excretion — the commonest, from renal failure,
from a deficiency or blockade of aldosterone,
and from potassium-sparing drugs and others;
and a shift of potassium out of the cells — from acidosis,
from cell breakdown such as rhabdomyolysis, tumour lysis or massive transfusion,
and from the depolarising muscle relaxant suxamethonium,
especially in susceptible patients.
The danger is to the heart: the raised potassium reduces the resting membrane
potential, impairing conduction and excitability,
causing characteristic electrocardiographic changes — peaked T waves,
a widening of the QRS — and progressing to dangerous arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
The emergency management has three aims: to protect the heart, by giving calcium,
which stabilises the myocardium; to shift potassium into the cells,
by insulin with glucose, and by a beta-agonist;
and to remove potassium from the body, by diuretics,
ion-exchange resins or dialysis.
So hyperkalaemia results from increased intake,
reduced excretion — chiefly renal failure and aldosterone problems — or a shift of
potassium from the cells; it endangers the heart,
causing electrocardiographic changes and arrhythmias;
and is managed emergently by calcium to protect the heart,
insulin-glucose and a beta-agonist to shift potassium into cells,
and measures to remove it — a critical emergency in anaesthetic practice.
Describe the causes and effects of hypokalaemia.
Hypokalaemia, a low plasma potassium,
is a common disturbance with important effects on excitable tissues,
and it must be recognised and corrected, particularly before anaesthesia,
because of its cardiac effects and its interaction with anaesthetic drugs.
The causes parallel those of hyperkalaemia in reverse: inadequate intake,
rarely alone; increased loss — the commonest, either renal, from diuretics,
mineralocorticoid excess and some other conditions, or gastrointestinal,
from vomiting, diarrhoea and drainage; and a shift of potassium into the cells,
from an alkalosis, from insulin, and from beta-agonists.
The effects are on the excitable tissues and elsewhere.
On the heart, hypokalaemia increases the risk of arrhythmias,
especially in those on digoxin, and causes electrocardiographic changes — flattened
T waves and the appearance of U waves.
It causes muscle weakness, and, if severe, paralysis and ileus.
It potentiates the effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
And it impairs the urinary concentrating ability.
The correction is by replacement of potassium, cautiously,
and treatment of the cause, including the magnesium that is often also depleted.
So hypokalaemia arises from inadequate intake,
increased renal or gastrointestinal loss — chiefly diuretics,
vomiting and diarrhoea — or a shift into the cells; it causes arrhythmias,
especially with digoxin, electrocardiographic changes, muscle weakness,
and potentiation of neuromuscular blockers;
and is corrected by cautious potassium replacement and treatment of the cause — a
disturbance important to identify and correct before anaesthesia.
Describe the renal compensation for chronic respiratory acid-base disorders.
The kidney provides the compensation for the respiratory acid-base disorders,
adjusting the bicarbonate to offset the disturbance in carbon dioxide,
and because this renal compensation is slow,
the distinction between acute and chronic respiratory disturbances depends on it,
a point important in interpreting blood gases.
In a respiratory acidosis — a primary rise in carbon dioxide,
as in chronic lung disease — the kidney compensates by increasing the secretion of
hydrogen ions and the production of ammonia,
so excreting more acid and generating and retaining more bicarbonate;
the raised plasma bicarbonate offsets the raised carbon dioxide,
returning the pH towards normal.
This takes two to three days to become complete.
So in an acute respiratory acidosis the bicarbonate has scarcely risen and the pH
is markedly low, whereas in a chronic respiratory acidosis the bicarbonate is
substantially raised and the pH much closer to normal — the degree of bicarbonate
compensation indicating the chronicity.
In a respiratory alkalosis — a primary fall in carbon dioxide,
as at altitude or with chronic hyperventilation — the kidney compensates
conversely, excreting bicarbonate to lower the plasma level and bring the pH down
towards normal, again over days.
So the kidney compensates for a chronic respiratory acidosis by retaining and
generating bicarbonate, and for a respiratory alkalosis by excreting it,
over two to three days; the degree of this slow bicarbonate compensation
distinguishing acute from chronic respiratory disturbances — the renal limb of
acid-base compensation, central to interpreting the blood gases.
Describe the urinary buffers and the minimum urine pH.
The excretion of acid by the kidney depends on buffering the secreted hydrogen ions
within the tubular fluid, because the amount of acid that can be excreted as free
hydrogen ions is tiny, limited by the minimum urine pH,
so the urinary buffers are essential to acid excretion.
The kidney can lower the urine pH only to a minimum of around four point five;
at this pH, the concentration of free hydrogen ions,
though a thousandfold that of the blood, is still minute in absolute terms,
accounting for a negligible fraction of the daily acid load.
So almost all the excreted acid must be carried in buffered form.
There are two urinary buffers.
The first is the filtered buffers, chiefly phosphate,
which combine with secreted hydrogen ions to form titratable acid;
the capacity of this is limited by the amount of filtered phosphate,
which is relatively fixed.
The second, and the adjustable one, is ammonia, produced by the tubule,
which combines with hydrogen ions to form ammonium;
its production can be greatly increased in acidosis,
so it provides the reserve capacity for acid excretion.
Without these buffers, the secreted hydrogen ions would lower the urine pH to the
minimum after only a little acid had been excreted.
So the urinary buffers are essential because the minimum urine pH of about four
point five permits only a negligible excretion of free hydrogen ions;
the filtered phosphate buffer forms titratable acid, of limited and fixed capacity,
while the tubular ammonia forms ammonium,
the adjustable buffer greatly increased in acidosis — together carrying almost all
the excreted acid, the basis of net acid excretion.
Describe the strong-ion, or Stewart,
approach to acid-base balance as it applies to the kidney.
The strong-ion, or Stewart, approach offers an alternative way of understanding
acid-base balance that gives particular insight into the renal contribution,
complementing the traditional bicarbonate-centred view, and it is worth outlining.
The traditional approach treats the pH as determined by the balance of carbon
dioxide and bicarbonate, the kidney regulating the bicarbonate.
The Stewart approach instead holds that the pH of a solution like the plasma is
determined by three independent variables: the carbon dioxide; the total weak acid,
chiefly albumin and phosphate; and the strong ion difference — the difference
between the fully-dissociated strong cations, chiefly sodium,
and the strong anions, chiefly chloride.
In this view, the bicarbonate is a dependent variable, not a cause.
The kidney's contribution to acid-base balance is then understood as its control of
the strong ion difference, principally by adjusting the excretion of chloride
relative to sodium: by excreting chloride — effectively excreting it with ammonium
rather than with sodium — the kidney raises the strong ion difference,
which raises the pH; and conversely.
So the renal handling of ammonium is reinterpreted as a means of excreting chloride
and so adjusting the strong ion difference.
So the strong-ion approach holds that the pH is set by the carbon dioxide,
the weak acids, and the strong ion difference — chiefly sodium minus chloride —
with bicarbonate a dependent variable;
the kidney regulating acid-base by controlling the strong ion difference,
principally by adjusting chloride excretion relative to sodium,
the excretion of ammonium serving to excrete chloride — an alternative but
complementary view giving particular insight into the renal and chloride
contributions to acid-base balance.
Describe the action of aldosterone on the principal cells of the collecting duct.
Aldosterone is the principal hormone regulating the final,
adjustable reabsorption of sodium and the secretion of potassium in the distal
nephron, and its action on the principal cells of the collecting duct is the
molecular basis of this regulation, important in volume and potassium balance.
The principal cells of the late distal tubule and collecting duct reabsorb sodium
and secrete potassium.
Sodium enters the cell from the lumen through epithelial sodium channels in the
luminal membrane, and is pumped out across the basolateral membrane by the
sodium-potassium pump, which simultaneously loads the cell with potassium;
the potassium then passes into the lumen through potassium channels,
so the reabsorption of sodium and the secretion of potassium are coupled.
Aldosterone, a steroid hormone, acts on these cells by entering them and binding to
the intracellular mineralocorticoid receptor;
the hormone-receptor complex acts on the genes to increase the number and activity
of the epithelial sodium channels, the potassium channels,
and the sodium-potassium pumps.
The effect is to increase sodium reabsorption and, coupled to it,
potassium secretion, and also hydrogen ion secretion by the neighbouring
intercalated cells.
So aldosterone acts on the principal cells of the collecting duct by binding the
intracellular mineralocorticoid receptor and increasing, through gene expression,
the epithelial sodium channels, potassium channels and sodium-potassium pumps —
increasing the coupled reabsorption of sodium and secretion of potassium,
and promoting hydrogen ion secretion;
the molecular basis of the regulation of sodium and potassium balance,
and the target of the potassium-sparing diuretics.
Describe the coupling of sodium reabsorption to potassium and hydrogen ion
secretion in the distal nephron.
The reabsorption of sodium in the distal nephron is coupled to the secretion of
potassium and hydrogen ions, and understanding this coupling explains several
clinically important interactions, including the effects of sodium delivery,
aldosterone and acid-base on potassium.
In the principal cells, the reabsorption of sodium through the luminal sodium
channels makes the lumen more electrically negative,
since a positive ion is being removed from it;
this lumen-negative potential then favours the secretion of potassium and of
hydrogen ions into the lumen, drawing these positive ions out of the cells down the
electrical gradient.
So sodium reabsorption drives, electrically,
the secretion of potassium and hydrogen ions. Several consequences follow.
An increased delivery of sodium to the distal nephron — as with a high sodium
intake, or with diuretics acting upstream — increases distal sodium reabsorption
and so increases potassium and hydrogen ion secretion, promoting their loss;
this is why loop and thiazide diuretics cause potassium loss and a tendency to
alkalosis.
Aldosterone, by promoting sodium reabsorption,
similarly promotes potassium and hydrogen secretion.
The availability of other anions affects it.
So in the distal nephron, sodium reabsorption through the luminal channels creates
a lumen-negative potential that drives the secretion of potassium and hydrogen
ions; so increased distal sodium delivery — from a high intake or from diuretics —
and aldosterone both increase potassium and hydrogen secretion,
explaining the potassium loss and alkalosis caused by diuretics and
mineralocorticoid excess — a coupling underlying many electrolyte and acid-base
interactions.
Why is a metabolic alkalosis dependent on chloride and volume for its maintenance?
The dependence of a metabolic alkalosis on chloride and volume depletion for its
maintenance is an important renal phenomenon,
explaining why such alkaloses persist and why they respond to saline,
and it follows from the renal handling of bicarbonate.
Normally, the kidney is very effective at excreting any excess bicarbonate,
so a metabolic alkalosis should be rapidly corrected; for it to persist,
the kidney must be prevented from excreting the bicarbonate.
The usual situation is a vomiting or diuretic-induced alkalosis,
which is accompanied by the loss of chloride and of extracellular volume,
and often of potassium. These depletions cause the kidney to retain bicarbonate for
several reasons.
The volume depletion stimulates avid sodium reabsorption;
since chloride is depleted and so less available to accompany the reabsorbed
sodium, more sodium is reabsorbed in exchange for hydrogen ions,
or with bicarbonate, sustaining the alkalosis.
The volume depletion also activates aldosterone,
which promotes hydrogen ion secretion. The potassium depletion further promotes
hydrogen ion secretion and bicarbonate reabsorption.
So the alkalosis is maintained until the chloride,
volume and potassium are restored — which is why these alkaloses are
chloride-responsive, corrected by giving saline and potassium.
So a metabolic alkalosis is maintained by chloride and volume depletion because
these cause the kidney to retain bicarbonate — the avid sodium reabsorption in the
face of chloride depletion proceeding in exchange for hydrogen ions,
aldosterone and potassium depletion further promoting hydrogen secretion;
so the alkalosis persists until chloride, volume and potassium are replaced,
hence chloride-responsive and corrected by saline — a phenomenon explaining the
persistence and treatment of these alkaloses.
Describe the acid-base disturbances of chronic kidney disease.
Chronic kidney disease characteristically causes a metabolic acidosis,
the nature of which changes as the disease progresses,
and understanding it follows from the renal mechanisms of acid handling and is
important in the management of these patients.
As functioning nephrons are lost, the kidney's capacity to excrete the daily fixed
acid load is progressively impaired,
so acid is retained and a metabolic acidosis develops. The pattern evolves.
In earlier and moderate chronic kidney disease,
the principal defect is a reduced capacity to produce ammonia — because there are
fewer functioning tubular cells — limiting the excretion of acid;
at this stage the acidosis is often of the normal-anion-gap, hyperchloraemic type.
As the disease advances to severe renal failure,
the falling glomerular filtration rate also causes the retention of the fixed acid
anions — sulphate, phosphate and others — which are normally filtered and excreted;
their retention adds unmeasured anions, so a high-anion-gap acidosis develops.
The acidosis has consequences: it contributes to the renal bone disease,
by the buffering of acid in bone, and to muscle wasting,
and it must be considered in the management. It is treated with oral bicarbonate.
So chronic kidney disease causes a metabolic acidosis: earlier,
a normal-anion-gap acidosis from the reduced ammonia production of the diminished
tubular mass; and, as it advances, a high-anion-gap acidosis from the retention of
filtered acid anions such as sulphate and phosphate;
contributing to renal bone disease and muscle wasting and treated with bicarbonate
— a disturbance following from the loss of the renal acid-handling mechanisms.
Describe the interaction between magnesium and potassium balance.
There is a clinically important interaction between magnesium and potassium,
such that a depletion of magnesium impairs the correction of a potassium deficit,
and an awareness of this is necessary for the effective management of hypokalaemia.
Magnesium and potassium are both predominantly intracellular ions,
and they are often depleted together, since the causes — such as diuretics,
gastrointestinal losses and poor intake — deplete both.
The important interaction is that magnesium depletion promotes renal potassium
wasting and makes a hypokalaemia refractory to correction:
the mechanism is that intracellular magnesium normally inhibits the potassium
channels in the distal nephron through which potassium is secreted,
so when magnesium is depleted, this inhibition is lost,
the channels are more active, and potassium is secreted and lost more readily — so
the kidney continues to waste potassium despite the hypokalaemia.
Consequently, attempts to correct a hypokalaemia by giving potassium alone may fail
if there is an unrecognised magnesium depletion;
the magnesium must also be replaced for the potassium replacement to be effective.
So magnesium and potassium are often depleted together,
and magnesium depletion promotes renal potassium wasting — because intracellular
magnesium normally restrains the distal potassium-secreting channels,
so its lack enhances potassium loss — making a hypokalaemia refractory to potassium
replacement alone; so magnesium must be replaced alongside potassium,
an important practical point in correcting hypokalaemia.
Describe the assessment of the renal contribution to an acidosis using the urine.
When a patient has a metabolic acidosis,
the urine can be used to assess whether the kidney is responding appropriately by
excreting acid, or is itself the cause through a failure of acid excretion,
and the urinary ammonium, estimated by the urine anion gap, is the key,
following from the mechanisms of acid excretion.
In a metabolic acidosis from a cause outside the kidney — such as diarrhoea or a
fixed acid load — the healthy kidney responds appropriately by greatly increasing
its excretion of acid, chiefly by increasing the production and excretion of
ammonium; so a high urinary ammonium indicates an appropriate renal response.
In a metabolic acidosis caused by the kidney — a distal renal tubular acidosis —
the kidney fails to excrete acid, so the urinary ammonium is inappropriately low.
The urinary ammonium is not routinely measured directly,
but it can be estimated indirectly by the urine anion gap — the difference between
the measured urinary cations and anions — because a high ammonium,
an unmeasured cation, makes the urine anion gap negative.
So a negative urine anion gap suggests a high ammonium and an appropriate renal
response, pointing to a non-renal cause such as diarrhoea;
a positive urine anion gap suggests a low ammonium and a renal cause,
such as a distal renal tubular acidosis.
So the urine assesses the renal response to a metabolic acidosis through the
urinary ammonium, estimated by the urine anion gap:
a negative gap indicating a high ammonium and an appropriate response,
suggesting a non-renal cause; a positive gap indicating a low ammonium and a
failure of renal acid excretion, suggesting a renal tubular acidosis — a useful
application of the mechanisms of acid excretion to diagnosis.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The kidney is central to acid-base balance as the only route for excreting
fixed (non-volatile) acid and the ultimate regulator of bicarbonate:
it reabsorbs all the filtered bicarbonate and excretes the daily acid load while
generating new bicarbonate, by tubular H+ secretion — powerful but slow (days),
completing the lungs' defence.
Second, Filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed (mostly proximally) indirectly:
the cell secretes H+ (for Na+) into the lumen,
where it combines with filtered bicarbonate to form CO2 + water (carbonic
anhydrase); the CO2 enters the cell and is reconverted to bicarbonate for
reabsorption — reclaiming filtered base rather than net acid excretion.
Third, Net acid excretion uses two urinary buffers:
titratable acid (chiefly phosphate) and, more importantly and adjustably,
ammonium (NH4+, from glutamine-derived ammonia + secreted H+);
for each buffered H+ excreted, a new bicarbonate is generated and added to the
blood.
Ammonia production is greatly increased over days in acidosis. 4.
The kidney responds to acidosis by increasing H+ secretion and (over days) ammonia
production, raising plasma bicarbonate;
to alkalosis by reducing H+ secretion and excreting bicarbonate — slow (2-3 days),
and impaired in alkalosis by volume/chloride/potassium depletion (which maintain
it).
Fourth, Potassium is filtered and largely reabsorbed proximally,
but excretion is regulated by distal secretion (principal cells,
driven by the Na/K pump), controlled chiefly by aldosterone, the plasma potassium,
and distal flow/sodium delivery (and acid-base status: alkalosis increases,
acidosis acutely reduces secretion).
Disturbances cause hypokalaemia (diuretics, vomiting,
mineralocorticoid excess) or hyperkalaemia (renal failure, K-sparing drugs,
acidosis) — both dangerous to the heart and important to correct before anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.